There are a number of advanced variants of
minimum edit distance that play a special
role in computational biology.
So recall that in computational biology,
what we're aligning is sequences of
nucleotides or sometimes proteins,
and our job is to take two strings like
this and produce an alignment like this.
So in biology, this is important for
a number of reasons.
We can be finding regions in the genome.
We could be discovering
functions of genes.
We could be looking for evolutionary
things by comparing different species.
This is also important for
assembling fragments of DNA sequencing.
We're going to be trying to assemble
fragments and we want to look for
overlapping pieces.
We'll talk about overlapping pieces and
find some matches between them.
Find that these two pieces match and we're
comparing individuals, and looking for
mutations.
Finding places where there
are similarities and differences.
In general, in natural language
processing, we talk about distance.
A string at a distance,
a minimum at a distance.
So we're minimizing distance and
we're computing weights for things.
In computational biology,
we're talking about similarities.
So, we are maximizing similarities.
So, we are asking how
similar two things are.
So, we're trying to maximize something and
we generally talk about
scores rather than weights.
So in computational biology,
the standard minimum at a distance
algorithm that we've just looked
at is called Needleman-Wunsch.
And I've shown you the algorithm here, but
it's the same thing that we saw before.
Although in general, we'll use d to mean
the cost of insertions and deletions.
And we'll have a little s value for
the substitution,
the positive or
negative value of substituting things.
And in general in biology, we'll talk
about positive cost for things that match.
Positive value for things that match and
a cost for deletions, and insertions.
So, here's the Needleman-Wunsch matrix.
And notice that as opposed to what we did
in natural language processing in general
and computational biology,
we put the origin at the upper left.
So, lets first look at some variants that
are important in computational biology.
So, one is cases where it's possible to
have unlimited gaps at the beginning and
end of a string.
And this happens exactly when we
have two little snips of DNA and
we know that the endpoints of one might
overlap with the ends of another, but
there might be something else
going on in other places.
So here's one long sequence and
here's another long sequence, but
it's just this piece of this sequence and
this piece of this that might overlap.
So, we don't want to penalize the fact
that there's other things going
on before here or after here.
So we'd like to modify the algorithm,
so it doesn't penalize gaps at the end.
And in fact, there can be various
different kinds of overlapping of
this sort.
This might happen when we're doing
sequencing and we have overlapping reads
or it might be that we're looking for
a piece of a gene inside another piece.
And so, we have a subset
piece inside a larger piece.
So the variant of the dynamic
programming algorithm that we use for
the overlap detection variant, we'll just
make a few small changes in the algorithm.
So first,
we just change the initialization, so
that it doesn't cost us anything
to start from a long string and
delete everything or insert everything.
So it used to be that we had -i*d here and
we had -j*d here.
And we've gotten rid of those,
because allowing ourselves
to start at a path at a random point
way out here in the intersection.
So, we're allowing ourselves
to start at zero cost here and
not be penalized for not matching
all these things up until here.
So we're looking for,
again, an edge overlaps.
And now for our termination condition,
we're going to start from not
from the upper right corner,
because we're allowing a match not
to go all the way to the edge.
But we'll find the place
along the final column or
the final row where we have the maximum
value and we'll trace back from there.
So in this case, our maximum value
is here in this last column and
we'll trace back from there.
A similar extension of the
Needleman-Wunsch or the standard dynamic
programming algorithm for string at
a distance is the local alignment problem.
So, here's the local alignment problem.
We have two strings X of length M and
Y and length N and we want to find two
substrings, whose similarity is maximum.
So, image that here's x and here's y.
We'd like to out of these two strings we'd
like to find these two substrings, cccggg.
That's the largest similar substring.
So it's very similar to the overlap
detection variant we saw
except not only do we allow
ourselves not to ignore previously
unaligned sequences at the beginning and
end, but also anywhere.
So, we can basically have our maximum
alignment be somewhere in the middle
as it is here.
So in order to modify the Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm to allow any kind
of local alignments, the new version is
now called the Smith-Waterman algorithm.
And we're first,
going to allow as we did for
the overlap detection variant
allow the initialization
conditions to be zero both for x and y.
So, we don't penalize ourselves for
initial strings.
And now we're going to make one more
modification, which is that in each cell,
when we're looking at the possible
places that we could come
from to choose the alignment.
We're not going to only pick the maximum
of the three previous cells,
but we're also going to
add a maximum of zero.
So we're going to let ourselves in
biology, we're talking about maximizing
similarity when things get very different
and we have a very negative score.
We're just going to start
all over again from zero.
Allow myself to just throw away
regions that don't align at all.
The termination condition of
the Smith-Waterman algorithm depends on
what we're looking for.
If we just want the best local alignment,
we'll pick the place that's
maximum in the entire array and
we'll trace back from there.
If we want all the local alignments that
score greater than some threshold t,
then maybe we'll find some
place that's greater than t.
Find all those places and
trace back all of them.
Now, this gets complicated by the fact
that there can be overlapping local
alignments.
So here,
we might have two alignments like this and
it might be that they actually
overlap tracing back.
So, there can be some complications here.
But if you want the best local alignment,
that's actually much easier.
So, here's an example of local alignment.
So let's imagine that we're getting one
positive point every time two symbols
match and a negative point for
any deletion, insertion or substitution.
And then let's look for
all the local alignments
between these two strings,
ATCAT and ATTATC.
If we fill in the matrix, again,
we start with zero's everywhere,
because we're doing local alignment.
If we then look for regions, cells that
have a maximum distance to trace back
from, we see two of these cells.
So one of them corresponds to
the alignment, ATCAT to ATTAT.
So we have four stings that match,
one mismatch, so
that going to be distance of three.
And the other one of them over here,
corresponds to the alignment
between ATC and
ATC where we have three matching symbols.
So, those are some of the more advanced
variants of edit distance that we
see in computational biology.